5.1 Objectives

To understand that complex problems that may otherwise be difficult to solve may have a simple recursive solution.
To learn how to formulate programs recursively.
To understand and apply the three laws of recursion.
To understand recursion as a form of iteration.
To implement the recursive formulation of a problem.
To understand how recursion is implemented by a computer system.

5.2 What is Recursion?

Recursion is a method of solving problems that involves breaking a problem down into smaller and smaller subproblems until you get to a small enough problem that it can be solved trivially.
Usually recursion involves a function calling itself. While it may not seem like much on the surface, recursion allows us to write elegant solutions to problems that may otherwise be very difficult to program.

5.4 Three Laws of Recursion

1. A recursive algorithm must have a base case.
2. A recursive algorithm must change its state and move toward the base case.
3. A recursive algorithm must call itself, recursively.

5.6 Stack frames with Recursion

A very literal way to visualize recursion is stack frames. In any program, when we open a reursive function, we start a stack frame to allocate those variables of the function.
Within this new stack frame, we call the function again, creating yet another stack frame. This continues until we call a case that doesn't create a stack frame, and then we mesh the frames together.

5.16 Glossary

base case : A branch of the conditional statement in a recursive function that does not give rise to further recursive calls.

data structure : An organization of data for the purpose of making it easier to use.

exception : An error that occurs at runtime.

handle an exception : To prevent an exception from terminating a program by wrapping the block of code in a try / except construct.

immutable data type : A data type which cannot be modified. Assignments to elements or slices of immutable types cause a runtime error.

infinite recursion : A function that calls itself recursively without ever reaching the base case. Eventually, an infinite recursion causes a runtime error.

mutable data type : A data type which can be modified. All mutable types are compound types. Lists and dictionaries (see next chapter) are mutable data types; strings and tuples are not.

raise : To cause an exception by using the raise statement.

recursion : The process of calling the function that is already executing.

recursive call : The statement that calls an already executing function. Recursion can even be indirect — function f can call g which calls h, and h could make a call back to f.

recursive definition : A definition which defines something in terms of itself. To be useful it must include base cases which are not recursive. In this way it differs from a circular definition. 
Recursive definitions often provide an elegant way to express complex data structures.

tuple : A data type that contains a sequence of elements of any type, like a list, but is immutable. Tuples can be used wherever an immutable type is required, such as a key in a dictionary (see next chapter).

tuple assignment : An assignment to all of the elements in a tuple using a single assignment statement. Tuple assignment occurs in parallel rather than in sequence, making it useful for swapping values.
